DEF CON 28: Safe Mode
7/8/20 - 9/8/20

Due to the ongoing pandemic, DEF CON was held remotely in 2020 for the first time in its 28 year history.
This was an ideal chance to remotely participate in an event which would normally not have been accessible due to travel costs.


\section{IoT Village}
- Participated in IoT hacking 101 labs which highlighted how easy it is to find hard-coded credentials in the firmware of IoT devices.
This further reinforces the idea that an IoT device would be a compelling choice of target for initial entry into a local network,
in addition to these devices probably being easy to locate due to the use of insecure, MAC address-based IPv6 addressing schemes.


- Sent an email about potential collaboration with the hosts of the interactive IoT hacking demos, Village Idiot Labs.
VIL are a Canadian non-profit organisation which aims to promote awareness of security risks in IoT devices.
There may be scope for collaboration here, depending on which datasets and resources are available - 
access to a wide range of IoT firmware would allow me to identify which devices are actually using IPv6,
and to assess the capabilities of any existing IPv6 stacks (global vs link-local addresses, addressing schemes, etc).
The collection of IPv6 pcap files from the Imperial and Northeastern IoT labs can shed some light on this through IPv6 addresses observed attached to data in transit,
but looking at the firmware directly can provide more detailed answers about the (lack of) security in IoT-specific IPv6 stacks.


- The 'Hacking the Supply Chain' talk explored the issue of the unknowing reuse of a specific TCP/IP library in IoT devices.
The vulnerabilities outlined in this talk are not relevant to the PhD, but the issue of library reuse and the lack of oversight in device production is important:
one flawed IPv6 stack could be used in many difficult to patch devices, especially given that IPv6 has a reputation for being difficult to implement from scratch.
It could be worth exploring a collection of IoT firmware samples featuring IPv6 stacks to identify similarities which imply reuse
(ie. is the same IPv6 stack being used by different manufacturers, or do they write their own?)


 
